This report was prepared by
[[https://www.linkedin.com/in/johntigue][John Tigue]] ahead of
[[https://github.com/JohnTigue/EbolaMapper/wiki/Africa-Open-Data-Group#meetup-of-2014-12-05][the
Africa Open Data Group (AODG) conference call of December 5th, 2014]].
It includes a status report of Tigue's action items from the group's
previous meeting. It also introduces various things produced while
following through on the action items, including: - [[Outbreak Time
Series Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification Overview]], an
open data spec for epidemic outbreak time series APIs -
[[https://github.com/JohnTigue/EbolaMapper][EbolaMapper]], open source
software which can read data conformant to the spec - [[A
survey|Datasets Listed on eboladata.org]] of all datasets listed on
http://eboladata.org - [[A survey|Gallery of Ebola Visualizations Found
Across the Web]] of Ebola outbreak visualizations from across the Web\\
- [[The EbolaMapper wiki|Home]], of which this report is a member.

The primary take away is that while surveying the situation (Tigue's
original action items) it became clear that there are deeper issues
which Tigue believes can be addressed with the proposed Outbreak Time
Series Specification, which hopefully can break future log jams
preventing the early, factual dissemination of outbreak numbers.

The *EbolaMapper* visualization tools are the proof of the concept yet
they are general purpose enough so that they can be reused in future
outbreaks. Both the software and the spec are in development and will be
usable by the end of December 2014.

** Table of contents
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: table-of-contents
   :END:

-  [[introduction][Introduction]]
-  [[survey][Survey of the Web's ebola 2014 outbreak data and
   visualizations]]
-  [[analysis][Analysis of the situation]]
-  [[next-actions][Next actions]]
-  [[further-info][Further information]]

** Introduction
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: introduction
   :END:

The previous meeting of the [[Africa Open Data Group]] was on
[[http://www.meetup.com/Africa-Open-Data/events/210071892/][November
7th, 2014]], during which the Ebola Open Data Jam was reviewed. Tigue
went away from that meeting with action items to: - review the datasets
cataloged during the Jam, at [[http://eboladata.org][eboladata.org]] -
code up some visualizations with those datasets

In the process of following through on the above action items, deeper
issues became clear as illustrated by the story of open data around the
2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa. To address both the above action
items and the deeper issues, which are not specific to the current ebola
outbreak, the following two closely related projects have been started
since the previous meeting of the group. - The [[Outbreak Time Series
Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification Overview]] is a simple
spec for defining Web service APIs and machine readable documents which
represent time series of epidemic outbreaks. -
[[https://github.com/JohnTigue/EbolaMapper][*EbolaMapper*]] is a new
open source software project for Web components which can read data
conformant to the Outbreak Time Series Specification, and optionally
visualize such outbreaks.

**** This report is a page in a wiki
@@html:<a name='context'>@@@@html:</a>@@
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: this-report-is-a-page-in-a-wiki
     :END:

This document is a page in a github.com hosted wiki. GitHub is *the*
Website where programmers share and collaborate on source code. In this
case the project is called *EbolaMapper*. The sidebar to the right of
this text, entitle *Pages*, list all the pages in this wiki alphabetical
by title.

This document weaves this wiki into a coherent story with many links
into the rest of this wiki. This report is short and high level, yet the
links quickly lead down into the technical nitty gritty of an open
source project.

** Survey of the Web's ebola 2014 outbreak data and
visualizations@@html:<a name='survey'>@@@@html:</a>@@
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: survey-of-the-webs-ebola-2014-outbreak-data-and-visualizations
   :END:

The good news is that since our previous meeting,
[[http://www.meetup.com/Africa-Open-Data/events/210071892/][the Africa
Open Data Group Conference Call of November 7th, 2014]], the Web's
availability of quality ebola outbreak visualizations has increased
significantly. See this wiki's [[Gallery of Ebola Visualizations Found
Across the Web]] for multiple examples, some of which are highly
interactive.

One of Tigue's action items from the previous meeting was to review the
datasets on http://eboladata.org. See [[Datasets Listed on
eboladata.org]] for brief comments on each of the 32 datasets. That page
in turn links into detailed technical analysis of some of the more
interesting datasets. In summary is a short list which can be found at
[[Recommendations for Data to Use in Web Apps]].

The conclusion of the above mentioned analysis is that by mid October
Web app usable data was available, in the form of CSV files and [[a
smattering of JSON hiding in places|JSON Ebola2014 Data Found on the
Web]]. Representative sources are cataloged in this wiki's page, [[Ebola
Outbreak Data on the Web Overview]]. Some examples worth noting:

1. On
   [[https://twitter.com/HansRosling/status/522906648638418944][2014-10-16
   Hans Rosling tweeted]], "The UN data on the Ebola epidemic is now
   freely available on the Internet" That data seems to be based on one
   of the [[datasets cataloged by the Ebola Data Jam|Datasets Listed on
   eboladata.org#ebola-data-jam]], specifically [[Caitlin Rivers'
   GitHub|Other Coders#caitlin-rivers]], which is very good work.

2. Currently, [[http://www.unocha.org/ochain/2010/rowca.html][The UN's
   OCHA ROWCA]] is updating a quality dataset on
   [[https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/dataset/rowca-ebola-cases][the UN OCHA
   Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX)]]. (The Ebola Data Jam also
   [[http://eboladata.org/dataset/sub-national-time-series-data-ebola-cases-and-deaths-guinea-liberia-sierra-leone-nigeria-and][found
   this dataset]].) This dataset is getting widely used, for example see
   [[http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/07/31/world/africa/ebola-virus-outbreak-qa.html][the
   New York Times' ebola visualization]]. It is assumed that this
   dataset also drives [[https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/ebola][the HDX
   ebola outbreak visualization]]. (It is an open question as to whether
   or not this dataset is derived from the Rivers dataset. The former is
   a spreadsheet, the latter is CSV.)

3. On 2014-11-12 [[HDX|HDX Repository]] blogged about [[ebola data API
   experimentation|HDX Repository#apis]]. Although this is not a
   dataset, this is relevant to point out here because APIs are what are
   really needed to solve this sort of problem.

Once data was available the count of high quality ebola outbreak
visualizations increased, as evidence by [[this wiki's gallery|Gallery
of Ebola Visualizations Found Across the Web]]. Yet, the situation would
be much better if there were a standard API for outbreak time series
thereby enabling interoperability.

**** Kudos@@html:<a name='kudos' >@@@@html:</a>@@
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: kudos
     :END:

Three people deserve special mention for their excellent work in this
area, see [[Other Coders]] for more details. - Caitlin Rivers has
manually collected outbreak time series data and maintained it in a
GitHub repository, which currently gets updated API-grade CSV files
roughly daily with 27 people contributing to the repository. - Simon
Johnson has banged out by far the best visualizations to date. - Luis
Capelo has done excellent work at the HDX on the back end repository and
their ebola dashboard.

** Analysis@@html:<a name='analysis'>@@@@html:</a>@@
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: analysis
   :END:

In researching this topic it became clear that the core issue is that
there is a serious problem with getting outbreak data publicly available
and visualized early in an emergency.

The heart of the data publishing process for the 2014 Ebola Outbreak in
West Africa started out with motivated volunteers manually screen
scraping data from Web pages and PDFs. The screen scraping became
[[https://github.com/luiscape/who-new-figures-alert][somewhat
automated]] later on but still this is 2014!

The convoluted story of
[[http://docs.hdx.rwlabs.org/a-new-ebola-crisis-page-built-with-open-data/][how
usable open data on the ebola outbreak was built up]] should never have
happened and must be prevented from reoccurring during future outbreaks.
Bravo to the folks who worked on the problem but the situation is
completely unacceptable in this day and age.

Another issue raised is that software tools must not assume a persistent
network connection. The West African context of the current ebola
outbreak has made it clear that outbreak monitoring tools need to work
in remote contexts without access to the Internet, which is simply not
how most Web sites are designed, see [[Internet and InterNOT]] for more
details.

** Next Actions @@html:<a name='next-actions' >@@@@html:</a>@@
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: next-actions
   :END:

As [Rob Baker(@rrbaker)](https://twitter.com/rrbaker) at USAID
[[https://twitter.com/rrbaker/status/530760280448704512][tweeted]]: >A
main takeaway from #iccmnyc: stop building closed off, complex shit.
Help an org turn their Excel files into APIs.

Once good data can be easily accessed then engagingly interactive
visualizations can illustrate an outbreak story. This seems like a
perfect situation for open source code reading open data through some
simple API. Defining APIs and writing software is what Tigue does
professionally. So, this open source project, *EbolaMapper*, has been
started with the following goals.

1. Define a simple epidemiological [[Outbreak Time Series
   Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification Overview]] for use
   by Web services etc.\\
2. Develop open source Web visualizations that engagingly present data
   read via the Outbreak Dashboard API

Hopefully, the above mentioned spec and software will accelerate the
diffusion across the Web of high-quality visualizations of the 2014
Ebola Outbreak and, arguably more valuably, prepare for quickly
visualizing future outbreaks.

These Web page based tools are being designed to work without live
Internet access.

It is a goal of this project to very quickly support the deployment of
Ebola 2014 Outbreak visualizations on various Web sites (governmental,
NGO, philanthropics, news outlets, and blogs). This will help maintain
the current outbreak's visibility in the public's mind.

After validation of this effort is realized by helping the world to
visualize the 2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa, the tools will be
thoroughly documented so that they are at the ready for the next
outbreak, global or local.

**** Call to action @@html:<a name='call-to-action'>@@@@html:</a>@@
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: call-to-action
     :END:

If all this sounds interesting to you then please jump in and help with
this open source project. All skills, technical or not, can be brought
to bear. -
[[https://github.com/JohnTigue/EbolaMapper/wiki/To-Do-List][The To Do
List]] provides an overview of where things are at.\\
- [[https://github.com/JohnTigue/EbolaMapper/issues][The Issue Tracker]]
is where to find the nitty-gritty.

** Further information @@html:<a name='further-info'>@@@@html:</a>@@
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: further-information
   :END:

Tigue's blog posts on the topic can be found at:\\
http://tigue.com/

Most information is in this project's wiki:\\
https://github.com/JohnTigue/EbolaMapper/wiki

To contact Tigue, the [[https://www.linkedin.com/in/johntigue][LinkedIn
profile]] has the info.
