This page is a curated collection of ebola outbreak data on the Web.
This collection provides an overview of the state of the situation via
notable examples. It is not meant to be an exhaustive catalog.

[[Recommendations for Data to Use in Web Apps]] is the place to go if
looking for data to code against.

The examples are broken down into three types.

1. [[catalogs][Data catalogs]]: human readable documents and Web sites
   which enumerate collections of known URLs at which ebola outbreak
   numbers are available.
2. [[repositories][Data repositories]]: Web sites at which multiple
   ebola datasets can be found. These are Web apps where data resides,
   as opposed to items in #1 above which are simply contain pointers to
   where data can be found.
3. [[api-feeds][Data via APIs]]: ebola outbreak data available via
   private APIs.

** Motivation
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: motivation
   :END:

The goal of this *EbolaMapper* project is to have open source code
(Apache 2.0 licensed) which can interactively visualize ebola outbreak
data in Web browsers (and do the same during future epidemic outbreaks,
ebola or otherwise). By definition, folks are free to do whatever they
like with Apache 2.0 licensed code. For example, say, a national health
ministry wishes to visualize their private info: they can deploy
*EbolaMapper* privately and knock themselves out, it's no one else's
business.

Ebola outbreak data is available at this project via the [[Outbreak Time
Series Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification Overview]],
licensed as open data under
[[http://opendatacommons.org/licenses/pddl/][PDDL]]. Real success will
be when other sites also provide data through the same APIs.

The following information was collected early in development while
searching for dataset that could be format via the [[Outbreak Time
Series Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification Overview]] such
that *EbolaMapper* could have some data to visualize.

** Catalog documents @@html:<a name='#catalogs'>@@@@html:</a>@@
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: catalog-documents
   :END:

1. Gapminder's list\\
   [[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1heaGh57rLNxvuvgBrnrlu1HKUy6oVqJQBKoSkOgSCFg/edit][List
   of datasources on the Web]] (a Google Doc)\\
   They also maintain
   [[https://www.google.com/calendar/embed?src=gapminder.org_9juis638146ec8q16297gugedg@group.calendar.google.com&ctz=Europe/Stockholm][a
   calendar of report release dates]]

2. Ebola Data Jam\\
   http://eboladata.org/dataset\\
   Analysis can be found on this wiki's page, [[Datasets Listed on
   eboladata.org]]

3. data.gov\\
   https://catalog.data.gov/dataset?q=ebola\\
   No analysis of this search result yet but a quick glance leads one to
   think there is significant overlap with what the eboladata.org effort
   has curated.

4. Another GoogleDoc spreadsheet\\
   [[https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1t-CA4FCupjXDC6rM5_aKCd_LnpO0MwPd1PCrNxwiYoM][A
   spreadsheet of ebola outbreak data]]\\
   This one was found via http://www.reddit.com/r/ebola

** Repositories @@html:<a name='#repositories'>@@@@html:</a>@@
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: repositories
   :END:

These repositories currently have ebola outbreak data but not real data
rich usable APIs, yet, although that is changing. These two are the most
important, as I believe they will be the two first place to deploy the
[[Outbreak Time Series Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification
Overview]] due to their current activity in the ebola response.

1. The Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX)\\
   See [[HDX repository]]

2. Open Humanitarian Data Repository (OHDR)\\
   See [[OHDR repository]]

** API feeds@@html:<a name='#api-feeds'>@@@@html:</a>@@
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: api-feeds
   :END:

There are a very few, about four, instances of Ebola2014 data available
in any form that could be called an API. CSV is being excluded from this
definition, even though its inclusion could be argued, especially in
light of standards like #HXL. No use of #HXL for Ebola2014 data is known
of.

Since before this project there was no API for outbreak data, the
instances of ebola-outbreak-data-in-JSON that have been found have
simply been JSON quickly banged out for the purposes of getting the data
from one server to one client. Let us call this a "private API." These
bits of JSON served their one-time purposes.

A goal of this project is that ebola outbreak information be available
via a standard APIs. This is what is being called [[Outbreak Time Series
Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification Overview]]. For future
outbreaks, ebola or otherwise, having a simple yet well defined API will
enable that speedy proliferation of outbreak data across the Web and
into Web site applications and mobile device apps (read: iPhone and
Android apps).

This project is the first and, as of yet, only source of HTTP Resources
which contains representations of outbreak data made available via the
[[Outbreak Time Series Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification
Overview]].

See [[JSON Ebola2014 Data Found on the Web]] for detailed analysis of
the few private APIs found on the Web. They were used during analysis to
come up with a global harmonized non-ebola specific set of [[Outbreak
Time Series Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification Overview]],
which has turned out to be one of the two major deliverables of this
project.
