The goal of this project is to make outbreak data a first class object
type in a web-native, machine readable fashion. The Spec enables that.
The proof of any data spec is its reference implementation (read:
software that actually works with data compliant with the
specification), which in this case is [[Omolumeter]].

It is completely unacceptable that in 2016 even
[[https://maimunamajumder.wordpress.com/2016/06/05/ddd-zika-in-colombia/][MIT
researchers have to scrounge for data on outbreaks]]: >Unfortunately,
one of the issues we've faced during the ongoing Central and South
American Zika outbreak has been a dearth of official case count data. In
recent weeks, this has been partially mitigated thanks to this
interactive, case count visualization PAHO released a little while ago.
However, it's worth noting that these data aren't in a machine-readable
format (and scraping from interactive visualizations can often be more
challenging than doing so from PDFs).

Although there is /some/ publicly published infectious disease outbreak
time series (sometimes referred to as case counts) there is no current
standard for interoperability. In June of 2016, The New England Journal
of Medicine published a "Perspective" article, entitled
[[http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1605148][Avoiding Data
Dumpsters --- Toward Equitable and Useful Data Sharing]]. Quoting: >One
of the risks posed by these expanding repositories is the production of
“data dumpsters”: repositories of data without the metadata, data
dictionaries, or documentation needed for meaningful or correct
reanalysis.

With regards to infectious disease outbreak time series, the Web is
currently a data dumpster.

** === Needs rewrite ===
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: needs-rewrite
   :END:

Turns out a major task of this project is to define the [[Outbreak Time
Series Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification Overview]],
curate some outbreak data, and the provide/host the curated/compiled
data as a Web service at omolumeter.com

[[Omolumeter]] initially was a tool for validating the data from any Web
service conformant with the [[Outbreak Time Series
Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification Overview]]. It is also
intended demonstrate multiple world-class visualizations of ebola
outbreak data; it is not just supposed to be some lame, minimal
proof-of-concept (which is all it is as of 2016-06-13). It is intended
to be the very best of its breed. That is to say the global Web game on
epidemic visualization needs to be seriously stepped up and
[[Omolumeter]] is intended to be the pace car.

There are many ebola visualization but very, very few that can be
considered excellent, and of those none are open source code that reads
open data via standard APIs. When [[Omolumeter]] has been deployed on
multiple Web sites (white labeled, locally styled, without any credit
given to this project) then this effort can be considered a success.
Further success will be evidenced by a speedier engagement of the world
during future outbreaks. i.e. this is not some one-off ebola specific
project. (In the parlance of the medical governmental types this is
"multi-use".)

A very important goal is to work with news outlets with an eye towards
the future. Work with them so that their internal cultures know of the
Omolumeter visualization codebase and [[Outbreak Time Series
Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification Overview]] so that they
will know how to get info out earlier next time. In this view, Ebola2014
is just a trial run for future outbreaks, certainly with regard to these
tools which came too late. Next time though...
