[[https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/][The Humanitarian Data Exchange]] (HDX)
is *the* place to pay attention to for ebola outbreak data in terms of
actual hosted data as well as modern visualizations thereof. See
[[https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/ebola][the HDX ebola dashboard]] for
evidence of this statement.

** Table of Content
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: table-of-content
   :END:

-  [[overview][Overview]]
-  [[code][Code]]
-  [[data][Data]]

*** Overview @@html:<a name='overview'>@@@@html:</a>@@
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: overview
    :END:

The HDX is a project of the UN with
[[https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/about][the goal of making "humanitarian
data easy to find and use for analysis."]] The HDX team is not your
grandfather's United Nations. Imagine if the Web start-up community has
an outpost in the UN: that would be the HDX. They are very much of the
open source mentality and they have a lot of code in public GitHub
repos. They also do a lot of the group management in public. This is
most encouraging.

The project is showing traction:\\
[[https://raw.githubusercontent.com/luiscape/hdx-in-2014/master/plots/number_of_registered_users.png]]

The HDX site itself is [[https://github.com/OCHA-DAP/hdx-ckan][a highly
customized instance of CKAN]]. In the governmental and humanitarian tech
crowds, [[http://ckan.org/][CKAN]] is a popular "data portal" document
repository open source codebase.

There are many datasets on HDX, not all of which are related to the 2014
Ebola Outbreak in West Africa. This page focuses on some of the ebola
datasets and code that uses those datasets. This is only a high level
overview. For detailed analysis of JSON and API at HDX, see [[JSON
Ebola2014 Data Found on the Web|JSON Ebola2014 Data Found on the
Web#hdx]].

*** Code@@html:<a name='code'>@@@@html:</a>@@
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: code
    :END:

This section reports on code from the HDX folks that was found on
GitHub. First I mention their API experiment which clearly indicates
that they have the big picture in mind (read: Web service API data feeds
in JSON).

**** APIs
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: apis
     :END:

Since at least 2013-10, these folks have completely understood what
needs to be done on the API front, see
[[https://github.com/OCHA-DAP/ProjectWiki/wiki/Data-APIs][Data APIs page
on their wiki]].

In 2014-07, experiments on this front can be seen:
https://github.com/luiscape/hdx\_api

As of 2014-11-12 they have started
[[http://docs.hdx.rwlabs.org/an-api-for-ebola-data/][experimenting with
an API for ebola data]]. Initially the information is extremely simple,
just top line summaries, not the nitty-gritty that is in the [[Outbreak
Time Series Specification|Outbreak Time Series Specification Overview]].
As CJ Hendrix wrote in the announcement: >It's an experiment!\\
We have just started to experiment with the CKAN Datastore and with this
dataset in particular. Most of our datasets are not datastore-enabled
right now. We may shortly be adding sparklines and other visualizations
that require a time series of these data, so the structure of this
dataset may change

This is great news because time series is part of exactly what this
project's [[Outbreak Time Series Specification|Outbreak Time Series
Specification Overview]] addresses. So, John Tigue is interacting with
them.

For detailed analysis of ebola related JSON from HDX see [[JSON
Ebola2014 Data Found on the Web|JSON Ebola2014 Data Found on the
Web#hdx]].

**** The HDX ebola dashboard
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: the-hdx-ebola-dashboard
     :END:

URL: https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/ebola\\
GitHub: https://github.com/OCHA-DAP/hdxviz-ebola-cases-total

This is very important, see [[JSON Ebola2014 Data Found on the Web|JSON
Ebola2014 Data Found on the Web#the-hdx-ebola-dashboard]] for detailed
analysis.

2015-01-07: found this:\\
http://docs.hdx.rwlabs.org/west-africa-ebola-outbreak-visualization/

**** The ebola narrative
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: the-ebola-narrative
     :END:

[[https://github.com/luiscape/Ebola-Narrative/network][In 2014-08 Capelo
was contributing]] to
[[http://simonbjohnson.github.io/Ebola-Narrative/][an ebola narrative]].
It's D3.js-based and can run (tested by JFT) via =file://= URLs so it
should be easily offlined, which is one of the things I am interested
in.

**** A HDX data gatherer and storer
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: a-hdx-data-gatherer-and-storer
     :END:

https://github.com/luiscape/hdx-datastorer-ebola-cases\\
>Collection of scripts to manage datasets on CKAN's DataStore.

https://github.com/luiscape/hdx-datastorer-ebola-cases/blob/master/data/data.csv\\
A well data typed CSV file that seems to get updated now and again. New
info is appended to the end. It has the top line numbers broken out by
country. For each country, info like cases (suspected, confirmed,
probable), same for deaths, both of those as Case fatality rate (CFR).

[[https://github.com/luiscape/hdx-datastorer-ebola-cases/blob/master/code/fetch-file.py][Some
code in here]] fetches data from an URL:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
    https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/api/action/resource_show?id=a02903a9-022b-4047-bbb5-45127b591c85
#+END_EXAMPLE

Which points to

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
    https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1LcGzK41O5xANVxTvympUwBBz_eioQJ7VJqzRh6r5XJc/export?format=csv
#+END_EXAMPLE

Which is a direct download of a CSV file of which contains the exact
information which comes out of [[the HDX top line numbers experimental
API|JSON-Ebola2014-Data-Found-on-the-Web#hdx-api-experiment]]. So, I
guess the former feeds the latter.

*** Data @@html:<a name='data'>@@@@html:</a>@@
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: data
    :END:

**** Sub-national time series data on Ebola cases and deaths
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: sub-national-time-series-data-on-ebola-cases-and-deaths
     :END:

This dataset is the most important one that needs to be paid
attention:\\
URL: https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/dataset/rowca-ebola-cases\\
License: public domain\\
> Sub-national time series data on Ebola cases and deaths in Guinea,
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Senegal and Mali since March 2014
>@@html:<br/>@@ > Ebola outbreak time series data at national and sub
national levels since March 2014. Data compiled manually from a number
of published reports. Updated by OCHA ROWCA every working day.

This is the first highly usable data I found. The data is available as
an Excell spreadsheet, Data Ebola (Public).xlsx. So, they still need to
figure out how to get that information easily and automatically
available via HTTP but it seems they are working on that.\\
https://github.com/luiscape/hdx-datastorer-ebola-cases

On 2014-11-14, JFT downloaded this and used it for development purposes.

**** Number of Ebola cases in Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria,
Mali, Spain and USA
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: number-of-ebola-cases-in-guinea-liberia-sierra-leone-nigeria-mali-spain-and-usa
     :END:

https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/dataset/ebola-cases-2014 >Total number of
probable, confirmed and suspected Ebola cases and deaths in Guinea,
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Senegal, Mali, Spain and USA. Extracted
from WHO: Ebola Response Roadmap Situation Reports, the latest of which
was on 19 November 2014

Related but not outbreak numbers -
[[https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/dataset/health-facilities-in-guinea-liberia-mali-and-sierra-leone][Health
facilities in Guinea, Liberia, Mali and Sierra Leone]]

**** EVD Cases by district
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: evd-cases-by-district
     :END:

https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/dataset/evd-cases-by-district >This data is
made available from the WHO - Global Health Observatory. Data on new
probable and confirmed cases by epi week and district. There is a file
for each country Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea. All the data from
the countries can be found at
http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.ebola-sitrep.ebola-country?lang=en
There are 2 values for each district. One is from the Ministry of Health
SitRep. The other is from the patient database maintained in country.
There is latency in getting the patient database is updated therefore
the numbers are lower in the latest weeks.

**** Treatment centers
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: treatment-centers
     :END:

https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/dataset/ebola-treatment-centers\\
*Ebola Treatment Centers or Units (ETCs or ETUs)* > This dataset
represents the best-known collection of status and location of the
facilities known as Ebola Treatment Centers or Ebola Treatment Units in
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, with relevant attributes and
information. Please forward any mistakes or requested changes to
unmeer.im@gmail.com. Updated frequently, latest update 26 November.
