**** Internet and/or Internot
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: internet-andor-internot
     :END:

[GoogleCrisisResponse
(@GoogleCR)](https://twitter.com/GoogleCR/status/530750584228691968) on
twitter: >Hongyi Hu: Humanitarian design principles to live by: Usable,
Inexpensive, Robust, Portable #iccmnyc

As the 2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa has demonstrated, tools need
to work in contexts without pervasive Internet connectivity. Considering
future outbreaks, West Africa is certainly not the only place where one
cannot assume a network connection to global Web servers.

Further an imagined context does not need to be a pandemic outbreak. It
could be a much more localize event. How do we enable a future lone
[[http://www.ph.ucla.edu/epi/snow/mapsbroadstreet.html][John Snow]]? For
up-country contexts, how does such a person get the job done where the
network is nothing more than, say, some [[http://one.laptop.org/][OPLC
laptops]] connected via USB sticks moving over a
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sneakernet][sneakernet]] serving as the
long haul network?

That can be done rather easily with nothing more exotic than modern Web
browsers. Consider [[http://www.openepi.com/Menu/OE_Menu.htm][OpenEpi]],
which along with *EbolaMapper*-type mapping visualization tools could be
pretty powerful yet not /require/ a Web server.

The critical issue is that the low-connectivity design goal has to
followed from the beginning. That is certainly not how most tools on the
Web work. Yet if the working in low-connectivity is a design goal, then
with a properly defined data APIs the same visualization tools can serve
one machine alone in the jungle or millions of clients hitting a Web
site.
