* Motivation
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: motivation
  :END:

This project seeks to define a simple data standard for infectious
disease outbreaks, and atop of that provide free software source code
which can visualize that information using web technology. This page
describes the motivation.

In researching the 2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa situation, the
main conclusion of this Outbreak Time Series project was that readily
available, *liberally licensed open source tools for producing visually
engaging outbreak dashboards* would help mobilize a response earlier and
[[http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cartoon/2014/oct/06/first-dog-how-to-beat-ebola][maintain
public awareness]] for the duration of a crisis.

An even deeper problem is the lack machine readable data standards for
outbreak data. During the Zika outbreak of 2016,
[[https://maimunamajumder.wordpress.com/2016/06/05/ddd-zika-in-colombia/][MIT
researchers were slowed down by a lack of data standards]]: >it's worth
noting that these data [from PAHO] aren't in a machine-readable format
(and scraping from interactive visualizations can often be more
challenging than doing so from PDFs). This, of course, adds an
additional, unnecessary step for researchers and curious minds alike

What millions of people might see is clearly of the greatest impact, but
more importantly there is a serious need for a data standard for
outbreak data. In other words, there needs to be standard data
structures and APIs to outbreak data. Visualizations implemented upon
Web technologies (and that can be as simple as a static image in JPEG,
PNG, GIFF, etc.) are by definition first class objects in the Web. *What
is missing is for the data behind the visualization to also be first
class objects on the Web.* The way to make that happen is for APIs and
Web-native formats. For data on the Web that means
[[http://www.json.org/][JSON]] and
[[https://www.w3.org/2013/csvw/wiki/Main_Page][CSV]], and to a lesser
extent [[https://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml/#sec-xml-wg][XML]] (yup,
shameless self-plug there).

** Epidemic data for the 2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: epidemic-data-for-the-2014-ebola-outbreak-in-west-africa
   :END:

In February 2014, the first case reports of the West Africa ebola
outbreak surfaced in Guinea, although via retroactive tracking it seems
[[http://blogs.unicef.org/2014/10/27/ebola-finding-patient-zero/][the
outbreak started in December 2013]]. For months, outbreak numbers had to
be manually screen scraped from Web pages and PDF files. Therefore
quality reusable data only became
[[https://blog.datamarket.com/2014/10/15/ebola-data-on-datamarket/][widely
available to the public]] in mid October 2014.

What if someone in Guinea could have started engagingly publishing their
own data back in February 2014? What if MSF had been able to cheaply and
easily deploy compelling visualizations on their Website? Open data,
well defined by a simple [[Outbreak Time Series Specification|Outbreak
Time Series Specification Overview]], published simply on the Web and
visualized by liberally licensed
([[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gratis_versus_libre][gratis and
libre]]), pre-built tools would have helped.

It is expected that more and more infectious disease outbreaks will
occur in the near future.
@@html:<a href='https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/jun/11/winners-2016-agar-art-competition-photos'>@@
[[https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JohnTigue/ebola-viz-twumbshots/gh-pages/not-golden-ratio/twelve-year-of-yuck.png]]@@html:</a>@@
(via
[[https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/jun/11/winners-2016-agar-art-competition-photos][The
Guardian]])

** Map data
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: map-data
   :END:

As the recent financial support contributed by MSF and the Red Cross to
[[http://hot.openstreetmap.org/][HOT's]] recent
[[http://www.economist.com/news/international/21632520-rich-countries-are-deluged-data-developing-ones-are-suffering-drought][MissingMaps.org]]
project demonstrates, the need for quality maps needs to be solved
proactively for future outbreak and other disaster responses. Clearly,
HOT is a successful open source community yet in the venture capital
fuled software start-up context such open source projects are actually
funded by commercial interests. Now with the added fuel,
MissingMaps.org's work will proceed much more quickly. But now ask: what
tools will global and local parties use that track an outbreak, using
the OSM maps?

* The vision
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: the-vision
  :END:

Which leads me to the Outbreak Time Series project. Consider the
Liberian government's ebola outbreak dashboard
[[http://ebolainliberia.org/][ebolainliberia.org]]

As the site states:\\
>This project commissioned by Liberia's Ministry of Information and
Communication seeks to provide a central location for the latest data
about the Ebola Epidemic.

This is the sort of thing that should just come out of the box for
future epidemics. Note that [[http://ebolainliberia.org/about.html][15
professionals]] were involved in producing that site. The goal of this
Outbreak Time Series project is for such a team to consist of one
amateur "script-kiddie" in the future.

Using [[Simon Johnson's work|Other-Coders#simon-johnson]] as evidence,
one D3.js coder can work wonders. And if a data API were available with
which to feed data into such visualization, then there is reusable
front-end or a global outbreak monitoring network. If such dashboard
widgets were made freely available, then in the future a "script kiddie"
could put up a dashboard in a few hours. And that would be only the
first use of the data standard; next the data would be publishable and
aggregate-able which leads to all manner of interesting possibilities...

** Outbreak Time Series project blog
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: outbreak-time-series-project-blog
   :END:

http://tigue.com/

Tigue has recorded the ongoing story of the Outbreak Time Series project
in [[http://tigue.com][his blog]], which also is arguably the best place
on the Web for pictures of and links to [[visualizations of the 2014
Ebola 2014 Outbreak in West Africa|Gallery of Ebola Visualizations Found
Across the Web]]. Reading through those posts is a great way to see what
motivated this project.
