This is the home page for information about The Outbreak Time Series
Specification. The [[primer|Outbreak Time Series Specification Primer]]
is a good place to start learning. Clearly, this is a work in
progress...

** Table of Contents
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: table-of-contents
   :END:

-  [[introduction][Introduction]]
-  [[documents][Documents]]
-  [[code][Code]]
-  [[data][Data]]

** Introduction
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: introduction
   :END:

The data model described by The Outbreak Time Series Specification (the
Spec) is intentionally simple and specific. The Spec quantifies *only
the population level information* required for representing on the World
Wide Web, as first class objects, information about infectious disease
outbreaks. The Spec includes specific web-native serialization for
transferring the information over the web and file systems. The
information is sufficient for the exchange of outbreak information
between governments, GNOs, researchers, etc. The information can also
drive spatio-temporal visualizations of epidemics.

*[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personally_identifiable_information][Personally
Identifiable Information (PII)]] is explicitly out of scope.* The Spec
is not intended to address things like line lists nor contact tracing;
doing so would involve a much greater level of complexity, technically
and politically.

The core data serialization is based upon
[[https://www.w3.org/2013/csvw/wiki/Main_Page][the W3C's CSV for the Web
(CSVW)]]. CSVW fits the definition of "web-native" as used here. CSVW
serializations are mainly CSV files plus a bit of JSON for metadata and
schema information. The CSVW Working Group defined algorithmic was of
translating CSVW JSON+CSV information into pure JSON and XML (RDF), so
systems which need such formats can also consume Spec-compliant
documents.

** Designed to enable easy adoption
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: designed-to-enable-easy-adoption
   :END:

The Spec has been designed to be intentionally simple in order to enable
small, quick wins while staying out of any privacy concern quagmires (as
much as possible). Yet just this small bit of structure might have a big
payoff quickly.

The Spec defines a novel, specific was of structuring outbreak data.
Nonetheless, the Spec has also been intentionally designed to work as
well as possible with existing CSVs already deployed on the web. CSVW
can used to "up translate" existing CSVs on the Web, see the W3C's
[[https://www.w3.org/TR/2016/NOTE-tabular-data-primer-20160225/#shared-schemas][CSV
on the Web: A Primer]]: >CSV on the Web is designed to enable you to
reuse the same schema when publishing multiple CSV files, even if those
files are created by different organisations and therefore reside in
different places... Experience shows that publishers of data in CSV
files often use their own headings for the columns... The titles
property allows you to provide multiple alternative titles that people
may use in an array.

In this way it is hoped that existing agencies will be able to "adopt"
the Spec with great easy in the short term, yet long term more and more
agencies will publish outbreak data intentionally fully conformant with
the Spec. This is a design strategy to improve the diffusion of
innovation.

** Documents
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: documents
   :END:

Relevant documents included the following. - [[Outbreak Time Series
Specification Primer]]: an informal introduction to the Specification.
The tutorial is non-normative but it is very informative. This is the
place to go to quickly wrap your head around the Spec and the type of
thing the Spec enables. - [[Outbreak Time Series Specification]]: the
core document. The Spec is a tightly worded technical document and
therefore is intentionally terse. It is not the place to start learning,
it is the place where the buck stops. - [[Outbreak Time Series
Specification Requirements]]: the reqs are not as formally written as
the Specification but they enumerate features of what a solution to the
problem at hand should encompass.

** Code
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: code
   :END:

@@html:<a href='http://tigue.com/projects/omolumeter/src/apps/omolumeter/'>@@Omolumeter@@html:</a>@@
is a client web app written in JavaScript which can read and visualize
Outbreak Time Series Specification compliant documents.

Various implementations conformant to this specification may make
available outbreak time series information in many ways, examples
include: as a single CSV file on a USB stick, as XML attachments to blog
posts, as XML markup namespaced into an Atom feed (which is actually how
a global outbreak monitoring network should be implemented but more on
that later), or as a set of HTTP URLs with can be used to fetch the
information as JSON. For a recommendation for how to do the latter ("a
web service API") case, see [[Outbreak Time Series web Service API
Design Recommendations]].

=outbreak_time_series_reader= is a JavaScript module which reads all
three serializations defined in the Outbreak Time Series Specification.
The =outbreak_time_series_reader= module runs in node.js based servers
and in web browsers (via browserify), compatible with various popular
frameworks, for example AngularJS. See [[outbreak\_time\_series\_reader
module]] for details.

** Data
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: data
   :END:

To actually code against a realization of those recommendations, there
is a GitHub repository which maintains an example set of HTTP URLs which
provide GETable data on the 2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa, see
[[Ebola 2014 Outbreak in West Africa data]]. Also maintained is a set of
CSV files which which provide the same information but which are
conformant to this Spec.

The Omolumeter client web-app is focused on reading data according to
the Spec, but it also reads existing well-kwown data feeds. For example,
the Omolumeter can read
[[file:-%20E.g.%20%5BWHO's%20Ebola%20data%20(CSV%20&%20JSON)%5D(http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.ebola-sitrep.quick-downloads?lang=en)][the
situation reports from the WHO]].
