This is a high level summary of what needs to be done. For nitty-gritty
details see
[[https://github.com/JohnTigue/outbreak_time_series/issues][the issues
tracker]].

If you want to jump in and help then these topics are sorted roughly
with the lower intensity and possibly more entertaining tasks listed
first.

** Cataloging of outbreak visualizations found on the Web
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: cataloging-of-outbreak-visualizations-found-on-the-web
   :END:

If you find any interesting visualizations, a gallery is maintained.
Please link to them at [[Gallery of Ebola Visualizations Found Across
the Web]]. Also search Twitter for
[[https://twitter.com/search?q=%23outbreak_viz&src=typd][#outbreak\_viz]].

If you have any comments about this the issue is
[[https://github.com/JohnTigue/EbolaMapper/issues/4][#4]].

** Indicator ontology
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: indicator-ontology
   :END:

An effort is underway to define an [[[indicator-ontology][Indicator
Ontology]]] so the machine readable encodings can be generated for terms
such as the following: "all deaths in the last 7 days," or "cumulative
suspected cases to date, in children." The Spec needs a vocabulary of
domain objects, the domain being infectious disease monitoring.

** Demo with Zika virus outbreak data
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: demo-with-zika-virus-outbreak-data
   :END:

The Omolumeter is deployed with 2014 Ebola data. Another deploy with
2016 Zika data is needed.

** Outreach
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: outreach
   :END:

*** Work with major news outlets, educating them to what is available.
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: work-with-major-news-outlets-educating-them-to-what-is-available.
    :END:

We need to reach out to various news orgs and show them how easy it is
to get an exciting ebola visualization widget on their site.

*** Help NGOs and philanthropics deploy Omolumeter as a widget
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: help-ngos-and-philanthropics-deploy-omolumeter-as-a-widget
    :END:

Work with an NGO to deploy a pre-build visualization with the help of
the [[Deployment HOWTO]].

** Documentation needed
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: documentation-needed
   :END:

Documenting how to use such tools in preparation for whatever infectious
disease outbreak next occurs (globally or locally) will be a main
deliverable of this project. Provide introductory HOWTO instructions for
various levels of technical expertise on how to deploy these tools
during future outbreaks.

These items are roughly sorted such that first is end-user stuff, then
deployer needs, then developer.

-  [ ] Exporting How to export data and visualizations out of
   Omolumeter. See [[Exporting from Omolumeter]]

-  [ ] HTML5 offline application instructions\\
   See [[Offline Mode]]

-  [ ] White label instructions\\
   See [[White Labeling]]

-  [ ] Localization How to localize to a language. See [[Localization]]
   page.

-  [ ] The outbreak data API\\
   See [[Outbreak API]]

** Cataloging of data sources
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: cataloging-of-data-sources
   :END:

This is much less light fun but is arguably more important. This has
proven to be a major time sink. It has also made very clear how
important it is to not have this happen in the future. See [[Ebola
Outbreak Data on the Web Overview]] for much more detail. That's the
place to add anything found.
