Videographics is simply a fancy word for video recording of someone
talking over graphics, preferably with dynamic and interesting motion. A
videographic can be as simple as a recorded screencast.

The Economist does a great job of this. Those "live charts," as they
call them ([[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WMyFNPIG_hQ][e.g.]]), sure
look like D3. I might be wrong but nonetheless the live charts could be
implemented in D3 is the point. You can check out more of their work on
[[https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL800D5CBC2E5E1AE4][The
Economist's Videographics YouTube playlist]].

To illustrate what tools like *EbolaMapper* enable please consider
[[http://www.ted.com/talks/hans_rosling_shows_the_best_stats_you_ve_ever_seen][Hans
Rosling's famous 2006 TED talk]]. Now check out a
[[http://bost.ocks.org/mike/nations/][D3 visualization of the same data
by Mike Bostock]].

Shoot, here's
[[https://twitter.com/nytgraphics/status/543147429273829376][the New
York Times on Twitter doing a videographic of someone clicking on their
excellent D3-based Ebola viz]].

For discussing the ebola outbreak, [[EbolaMapper.html]] be useful. It
has minimal trim. Fullscreen it and start recording your presentation.
Of course, without jumping into the code the only control you have of
what happens is through the UI. Not that controlling sequences with code
is particularly hard with D3.

So, if Hans Rosling were to record a screencast of him talking while
driving *EbolaMapper*, after someone watched the video they could then
go explore the outbreak via *EbolaMapper*. This seems like a very
engaging way to get people's attention on public health crises.

** How to produce videographic screencasts
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: how-to-produce-videographic-screencasts
   :END:

*TBD [[https://github.com/JohnTigue/EbolaMapper/issues/5][issue #5]]*\\
The section needs to have a brief write-up, mostly consisting of links
to good tutorials on the Web. There should also be a demo or two i.e.
links to videographics produced and uploaded to both YouTube and Vimeo.
